
= Configural

Version::    0.0.1
Date::       2011-08-22

Homepage::   http://github.com/jacius/configural/
Author::     John Croisant <john@croisant.net>
Copyright::  2011  John Croisant


== Description

Configural is a Ruby library for managing per-user configuration files
and data storage. It aims to provide an easy to use API to allow
applications to store and retrieve user configuration, cache, and
persistant data files without any hassle.

== Features

- Stores config, cache, and data files in the conventional location
  for each operating system. Comes with support for Linux, Mac, and
  Windows out of the box.
- Comes with support for YAML, JSON, and Plist config files out of the
  box (assuming you have the proper libraries; see the "Dependencies"
  section, below.)
- Really easy to add support for more operating systems and more file
  formats.
- Really, really easy to use!

== Dependencies

Configural's only dependencies are for the config file formats you
want to use:

- YAML: Requires 'yaml' (standard on most versions of Ruby).
- JSON: Requires 'json' (standard on some versions of Ruby, otherwise
  install the gem or download from <http://json.rubyforge.org/>).
- Plist: Requires 'plist' (install the gem or download from
  <http://plist.rubyforge.org>).

== Usage

Here is some basic usage information. For more details, see the
documentation for Configural::App, Configural::Config,
Configural::Data, and Configural::Cache.

If you want to add support for another operating system, see
Configural::Platform. If you want to add support for another file
format, see Configural::Config::FileBase.

=== Setting up

Before you can use any part of Configural, you must create an App
instance, like so:

 require 'configural'
 app = Configural::App.new("My App")

Replace "My App" with the name of your application. This string is
used to name the directories where your config, data, and cache files
are saved.

=== Config files

See the "Using Config Files" guide (docs/using_config_files.rdoc).

=== Data and cache files

Data and cache files are just files where you can read and write
anything you want. They have no special magic, except Configural helps
you store them in the conventional location for each OS.

You can use the +read+ and +write+ methods for convenience, or use the
+open+ method to get a File instance. +open+ accepts an optional mode
and an optional block, just like File.open.

 app.data['mydata.txt'].write("My data.")
 app.data['mydata.txt'].read         # => "My data."
 app.data['mydata.txt'].open{ |file|
   # Do whatever you want with the File instance.
 }

In this case, 'mydata.txt' refers to a file inside the data storage
directory, which is different for each operating system. Unlike
configs, you _should_ use a file extension when referring to a data or
cache file. (Configural can't automatically guess a file extension,
because data and cache files can be any file format you want.)

Caches work the same as data, except you use +app.cache+ instead of
+app.data+, and cache files are stored in a different directory.

== Where files are stored

Configural supports three kinds of files:

- Config: User preferences and other configuration settings.
- Data: Persistant data files. This could be used for things like
  saved playlists, installed add-ons, downloaded music files, or any
  other user data that should be preserved indefinitely.
- Cache: Temporary files created (for example) to save bandwidth or
  time. These are files that can safely be deleted by the user;
  deleting them won't break the application or cause data loss.

Each kind of file is stored in a different directory, as appropriate
to the conventions of the user's operating system.

(The following examples assume your app is named "My App".)

=== Linux

 Config: ~/.config/My App/
 Data: ~/.local/share/My App/
 Cache: ~/.cache/My App/

=== Mac

 Config: ~/Library/Preferences/My App/
 Data: ~/Library/Application Support/My App/
 Cache: ~/Library/Caches/My App/

=== Windows

 Config: %APPDATA%\My App\Config\
 Data: %APPDATA%\My App\Data\
 Cache: %APPDATA%\My App\Cache\

%APPDATA% is an environment variable with different values depending
on your version of Windows. The usual values are:

 XP: C:\Documents and Settings\%USERNAME%\Application Data
 Vista and later: C:\Users\%USERNAME%\AppData\Roaming

== License

Configural is licensed under the following terms (the "MIT License"):

Copyright (c) 2011  John Croisant

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
